Nadia Timperio

Dr. J. Sayers

ENGL 507

14 April 2015

**“Conveying _more_”: A Narrative Critique of Richard Wright’s _Native Son_**

In his essay, “Richard Wright’s Blues,” Ralph Ellison describes what he identifies as the “basic ambiguity” of Wright’s infamous protest novel, *Native Son* (1940): “in order to translate Bigger’s complicated feelings into universal ideas, Wright had to force into Bigger’s consciousness concepts and ideas which his intellect could not formulate” (272).  This critique that “Wright could imagine Bigger, but Bigger could not possibly imagine Richard Wright,” has dominated critical discourse regarding the novel since the 1960s (Ellison, “The World and the Jug” 162).  The “thousands of years of conscious culture” that Ellison identifies between Wright’s skillful mastery of the English language and Bigger’s stunted development suggests that Bigger would have never been able to convey his experience in the way that Wright has presented it (“Richard Wright’s Blues” 272).  Wright preemptively addresses this critical concern, among others in his 1940 essay, “How ‘Bigger’ Was Born,” commonly published alongside *Native Son*.  It was his aim to depict, through Bigger, the lives of men like himself who, growing up in racially segregated America, had “a wild and intense longing (wild and intense because it was suppressed!) to belong, to be identified, to feel that they were alive as other people were . . . to feel the clean, deep, organic satisfaction of doing a job in common with others” (440).  His motivation for attributing such extreme traits to the character of Bigger Thomas was to shed light on “the nature of the environment that produced” men like him (437); Bigger Thomas is as much a character as he is a symbol for all the other “Biggers” that Wright knew – men who consistently rebelled against systemic, institutionalized racism.  To communicate deeply personal and subjective ideas through an “objective guise” is the aim of most imaginative novels, and yet the risks taken by Wright in writing *Native Son* spark greater debate than many other novels written with similar authorial motivations.  Aware of his unique position as an educated black man who grew up experiencing the Jim Crow laws of the South, Wright “restricted the novel to what Bigger saw and felt, to the limits of his feelings and thoughts, even when [he] was conveying *more* than that to the reader” in order to protect himself from claims of misrepresenting Bigger’s circumstances (459).  The “*more*” that Wright conveys to the reader is the focus of this analysis.

Whereas Ellison maintains that literary realism, like *Native Son*, is inherently conservative because it affirms prevailing social myths, Damon Marcel DeCoste suggests that Wright employs realism as an oppositional force through which “words [can] be weapons” (129).  He argues that Wright effectively critiques America’s “class and race relations” by showing how misrepresentations foster oppression and alienation.  Therefore, in *Native Son*, realism itself is a discursive mode, “cast as a struggle against not only poverty and racism, but the popular American myths and values that perpetuate this poverty and racism” (130).  Following Ellison’s and Laura Tanner’s identifications of the problematic narrative presence in the work, I consider the consequences of having the story presented by a third person, intrusive narrator who is clearly more politically informed and verbally articulate than Bigger.  I consider Christopher Douglas’s argument that Wright’s interest and exposure to Chicago sociology created for him “a way of conceptualizing the status of African American culture and what social and political goals might work toward” – concerns that Marxism was unable to account for (79).  It was Wright’s experience by the 1940s that the American Communist Party, to which he belonged, merely sustained a well intentioned, but ultimately superficial, commitment to solving “the Negro problem” (79).  Building upon this knowledge of Wright’s wavering faith in his political affiliations, this essay engages Wright’s most controversial literary text as a strategically constructed narrative that critiques the practices and ideology of the American Communist Party specifically, and white America more generally.  While many critics accept Max as the authorial spokesperson based on Wright’s associations with the Communist Party, I choose to read Max *as* the narrative voice.  As such, I see in Wright’s construction of the novel a critique of Marxist and Communist Party ideals.  Wright’s narrator inadvertently participates in the Othering of Bigger; his telling is complicit in the very institutionalized racism that his political party aims to and claims to correct.  This paper hopes to illustrate Wright’s critique of American Communist practices through an examination of *Native Son*’s unconventional narration.  First, I will provide textual evidence to support my reading of Max as the narrator.  Next, I explain my choice to conduct an algorithmic reading of the novel’s first book in support of this research and detail my procedure.  Finally, using these results, I will illustrate how Max’s inability to tell Bigger’s authentic story is revealed through his constant attempts to access Bigger’s thoughts and feelings.  This failure to narrate responsibly, I argue, reflects Wright’s growing criticism of the Communist Party’s inability to solve “the Negro problem.”

“Book Three: Fate,” particularly the introduction of Bigger’s communist lawyer, Boris A. Max, has largely been regarded by critics as “an ideological intrusion which disrupts the artistic unity” of the novel (Miller 501; Elder; Precoda).  Wright’s political affiliation with the Communist Party has served as justification for assuming Max functions as authorial spokesperson.  Although the obvious ideological agenda of the novel’s third book stands unskillfully in contrast to the slightly more nuanced storytelling in books one and two, the introduction of Max in this part is integral to the novel’s development and to my interpretation of the text.  As James A. Miller identifies, “one important consequence of the centrality some readers and critics confer upon Max’s role in *Native Son* is that it inevitably leads to the conclusion that Bigger Thomas himself is inarticulate, incapable of negotiating the conflict between “thought” and “feeling” which defines his emotional life for a great deal of the novel, incapable of telling his own story and, therefore, of defining himself” (501).  Here, I propose an alternative reading of Max’s centrality that directly connects the linguistic sophistication of the narrative voice with the speech patterns of Bigger’s lawyer.  Following that the narrative style starkly contrasts Bigger’s quoted utterances, this essay calls into question the narrator’s ability to accurately communicate Bigger’s feelings and motivations to the reader.  

Various oddities such as racial origin and socio-economic status can be gleamed based upon one’s proficiency with English language.  Bigger is black, semi-literate, and woefully low in socio-economic standing; his language skills convey all of this.  Contrarily, the narrative voice skillfully uses figurative language to convey abstract concepts; this voice is obviously well educated, likely of at least moderate socio-economic means, and likely white.  Evident throughout the novel is the reality that language as an indicator of class will be the very factor to ensure Bigger maintains his marginalized social position and the narrator, his privileged one: “The facility with which the narrator utilizes the master language is a sign of the degree to which he is implicated in the very system against which Bigger defines himself” (Tanner 423).  It is the master language communicative system that Bigger is unprepared for and yet finds himself immersed in; therefore, within this framework, he cannot assert his self-worth or defend himself against prejudice.  Beyond his presumed capability to efficiently write in “white” English, I read Max, a white lawyer, as the particular privileged voice of the narrator because of a specific sense of repetition that persists across the narration of the first two books and carries into Max’s speech in “Book Three” of the novel.  As Tanner has deconstructed, the motif of “creation” is used to describe Bigger’s killings throughout the novel (425-6).  After Mary’s accidental death, the narrator notes that Bigger “had murdered and had created a new life for himself” (Wright, *Native Son* 138), but by the time he premeditatedly kills Bessie, the narrator raises the stakes, noting that he had “committed murder twice and had created a new world for himself” (291).  At the end of the novel, Max provides the following explanation of Bigger’s actions as natural to the court: “The actions that resulted in the death of those two women were as instinctive and inevitable as breathing or blinking one’s eyes. It was an act of *creation*!” (446).  The similar diction is not coincidental, and the prosecution’s expressed outrage that “the defense would have us believe that this was an act of *creation*!” serves to alert the reader to this intentional word choice (479).  Finally, the voice of Max becomes indistinguishable from the narrator’s by the end of the defense’s extensive speech for two reasons: first, the reader is inclined to forget that it is a speech and not pages of rambling narration; and second, the language used by Max reads so similarly to the preceding and proceeding narration, the reader is apt to accept them as one voice (Tanner; Siegel).  For these reasons, I accept Max as the narrative voice.

Each part of *Native Son*—“Fear,” “Flight,” and “Fate”—is aptly titled to reflect the dimension of Bigger’s interior that shifts and transforms in that phase of Bigger’s defeat.  This project is informed by an algorithmic reading of “Book One: Fear,” in which Wright uses naturalism – the notion that man is constructed by social, economic, and political forces beyond his control – to portray Bigger's predicament.  As W. Lawrence Hogue notes in his post-colonial, existential reading of the text, by placing Bigger in various “test-tube situations,” Wright shows how the character has been conditioned to behave in a particular way (Hogue 13).  Bigger appears to be largely a victim of his environment; while he has no control over the forces of oppression acting upon him (i.e. segregation, the American Dream, patriarchal masculinity, capitalism), Bigger is compelled to act in response to them, and the tension produced in this conflict manifests in his violent acts of aggression. 

Following Stephen Ramsay’s understanding that digital humanities should not take over entirely from traditional literary studies but be more enthusiastically integrated into the existing field, I draw on computational modes of text analysis to generate evidence for my literary argument (81).  Reading like a computer and the subsequent computational procedure performed on the text using Python produce evidence that supports my thesis, thereby helping to reach literary conclusions.  Stephen Best and Sharon Marcus understand the text’s surface to be “what is evident, perceptible, apprehensible . . . what insists on being looked *at* rather than what we must train ourselves to see *through*” (9).  Within their framework, I examine the narrative patterns of *Native Son*.  My algorithmic reading of the book effectively modifies Wright’s text in order to highlight what it already accomplishes: a critique of white America’s failing attempts to solve “the Negro problem.”  In Best and Marcus’s terms, I attend to what is present in order to reveal what is absent; my surface reading is in service of a more objective, “more accurate,” and therefore more meaningful symptomatic reading (17).  This project’s methodology involved two levels of algorithmic processing.  First, I conducted an algorithmic reading of the text by establishing principles and modifying the text’s organization in accordance with said principles.  My manual algorithmic reading organized the text file of “Book One” according to narrative style: line breaks were inserted before and after each identification of Bigger’s emotions, made by the narrator.  While these identifications are mostly plainly stated (e.g. “He hated himself in that moment”), less clear occur.  The phrase “he felt” appears over forty times in the first book of the novel (e.g. “He felt foolish”); however, as Tanner argues, in many of these instances the narrator supplies feelings for something Bigger knows (e.g. “He felt that it was always possible”).  Other times, the narrator uses this linguistic form to report on Bigger’s sensory experience (e.g. “He felt the cold metal of the gun resting against his naked skin”), though this is a rarity and mostly irrelevant to my analysis.  This process of reading and modifying according to defined principles revealed many ambiguous instances, which prompted further definition.  For example, the narrator uses the word “nervously” twice to convey Bigger’s feelings of anxiety; adverbs are therefore included in the list of emotions (see attached, “emotions.md”).

Throughout the novel, actions and conversations are supplemented by a description of Bigger’s thoughts and emotions.  That which Bigger does not articulate, the narrator takes up in his own voice.  As previously mentioned, text analysis revealed over forty instances in which the narrator conveys that Bigger felt a particular way using the phrase, “he felt,” often making use of metaphor or figurative language.  In one such instance, the narrator reports that Bigger “felt ensnared in a tangle of deep shadows” when his initial resistance to join Mary and Jan in the restaurant brings Mary to tears (102).  Elsewhere, it is conveyed that Bigger “felt that he had been in the grip of a weird spell and was now free” (119).  This “feeling” occurs after Mrs. Dalton retreats from Mary’s bedroom and Bigger experiences relief that he has not been caught alone with his employer’s young, white daughter.  In her reading of Wright’s text, Laura E. Tanner discusses these frequent descriptions, arguing that the “elaborate linguistic” telling of *Native Son* “disguises and transforms Bigger’s consciousness in the very act of representing it” (413).  Tanner points to occasions within the narrative that she describes as conveying “a condescending tone that verges on racist objectification” (416); since the narrator has the ability to write with a sophisticated command of the language while Bigger does not, any attempt by the narrator to give voice to the Bigger’s unspoken interior monologue resultantly produces generalizations, which create the impression of Bigger as a “dumb, driven” flat character (Wright, Native Son 328).  The narrator seizes the opportunity to create “a reality which [Bigger’s] silence is said to affirm,” with his ability to interpret and communicate both the subjective and objective elements of Bigger’s experience (Tanner 416).  Additionally, the sharp contrast between the narrator’s metaphorical language and Bigger’s disjointed struggle to communicate highlights Bigger’s inherent unsophistication and relatedly, his “limited scope” of action (415).  Tanner suggests that the narrator actually subverts Bigger’s authority through his attempt to validate it and thus, it is impossible to read *Native Son* as a reliable accurate account of Bigger’s consciousness.  However, Wright’s narration does present the opportunity to be read as a critique of those who would try to pin down Bigger’s story, Max included.  

According to Python’s text analysis, the passage with most negative net sentiment score (-0.090909091) occurs during this same exchange between Bigger and Gus.  The phrase, “he had transferred his fear of the whites to Gus” connects Bigger’s fear of Gus’s potential to derail his robbery plans and his hatred toward Gus for this power that he holds (Wright, *Native Son* 50).  What Bigger hates about Gus is the fact that he sees himself—his fears, his powerlessness at the hands of white America—in Gus and resents the fact that that which has a hold on Gus, which is also what Bigger aims to combat through his plan to rob a white storeowner, is the very thing that threatens to stop his plan and ensure he remains oppressed.  Another passage with a strongly negative net sentiment score (-0.076923077) occurs immediately following this scene in the pool hall.  


> Outside his window, he saw the sun dying over the roof-tops in the western sky and watched the first shade of dusk fall.  Now and then a streetcar ran past.  The rusty radiator hissed at the far end of the room.  All day long it had been springlike; but now dark clouds were slowly swallowing the sun.  All at once the street lamps came on and the sky was black and close to the house-tops. (69)

Notably, both of the above negative passages have a positive sentiment score of zero, further emphasizing their lack of hope, light, and happiness.  However, even more interesting than the sentiment scores that Python’s text analysis reveals are the word counts of passages between narrated emotions.  The passages with the greatest word counts (1000 words and 800 words) occurred at the end of the book during the scene when Bigger realizes he has killed Mary and decides what his next move will be, and then during the passage in which he carries Mary’s body down to the basement and disposes of her in the furnace.  Ostensibly, Bigger’s actions at this time require no mediation – the narrator’s work of condemning Bigger as “lesser” is done for him.  The next highest word count passages appropriately appear during dialogue-heavy scenes; the first when Bigger, Mary, and Jan converse over chicken at Ernie’s Kitchen Shack (770 words), the next during the introductory conversation between Bigger, Mr. Dalton, and Mary (716), and the third during a conversation between Bigger and Gus (703 words).  This evidence substantiates Tanner’s claim that the narrator’s imposition of emotionality is necessary to construct the telling of the story that Bigger does not supply through voice or action.

Between Max and Bigger there exists a significant language barrier, which I argue prevents the establishment of a productive narrative partnership (i.e. narrator and subject).  The Black Vernacular English that is natural and familiar to Bigger is incomprehensible and unacceptable within the avenues for social mobility, thereby excluding Bigger from gaining the opportunity to negotiate his social destiny.  Ultimately, Bigger’s unfamiliarity with the master language catalyzes the chain of events leading to his demise.  During his first interaction with the Daltons, the narrator notes how Bigger’s uncomfortability manifests in communicative failure as he stutters and almost exclusively responds to questions with “Yessuh,” or “Yessum,” the appropriate respectful responses he has presumably been instructed to use when interacting with whites (Wright, *Native Son* 70-80).  The narrator interprets Bigger’s avoidance of Mr. Dalton’s eyes: 

> He hated himself at that moment. Why was he acting and feeling this way? . . . There was an organic conviction in him that this was the way white folks wanted him to be when in their presence; none had ever told him that in so many words, but their manner had made him feel that they did . . . Goddamn Clumsily, he searched for the paper. He could not find it at first and he felt called upon to say something for taking so long. (75)

This introduction into the Dalton home signals the moment Bigger loses any sense of control.  His inability to speak the language of his white employers precludes his loss of any autonomy; unable to communicate using Standard English, Bigger forfeits any power he could have had over his own fate.  Additionally, it is made clear that he will not benefit from the Daltons’ generosity in the same way that their last employee did, by attending night school and receiving an education (90). 

Wright most skillfully illustrates the closeness of the relationship between voice and power through the relationship between Bigger and Mary.  Having seen her in a newsreel at the movie theatre, Mary already represents to Bigger the possibility of upward social mobility before meeting the Daltons.  Under counsel from Gus, Bigger plans to “learn to stand in with” the “hot-looking number” so that he might benefit from whatever closeness with her has to offer (Wright, *Native Son* 58).  During their first encounter, Mary unintentionally manipulates Bigger into agreeing with her unfavourable assessment of her father.  She asks Bigger if he thinks that Mr. Dalton is a capitalist, at which point the narrator provides that Bigger “did not know what a capitalist was,” and instead “looked at the floor and did not answer” (80).  As James Fairfield notes, “merely presenting Bigger with a term for which his experience has provided him with no basis for signification, Mary assumes complete control over him,” the same control that later permits her to place Bigger in the incriminating position of having to retire her to her bedroom, undetected (74-5).  Although Mary likely does not realize the power she possesses, she exerts it just the same.  Having had opportunities that Bigger has not, Mary’s mastery of Standard English positions her to be able to confuse and intimidate Bigger into acting according to her agenda.  Mary’s voice that has been afforded to her because of her race and family’s socio-economic status precludes Bigger from having his own voice.  It is profoundly symbolic then that when he stands to be discovered in her bedroom, it is the possibility of her speaking out that threatens to reveal his presence.  Ironically, Bigger kills Mary by holding a pillow over her mouth, stifling that which she takes for granted and he desires.  Even though it is accidental, Bigger succeeds in creating his own “voice” through Mary’s death – acts of aggression are a universal communicator (76).  Keeping with the “creation” motif, through Mary’s death, Bigger creates a novel language that he can confidently and effectively communicate in, but more importantly, that transcends racial divides.  The language of violence is one that is understood by blacks and whites, educated and uneducated, Marry and Bessie. 

Conflict between the symbolic narrative world and the physical experienced world that Bigger knows reveals Max’s unreliability as a narrator.  The narrator imposes meaning onto Bigger’s life through the use of elaborate metaphorical language; he takes advantage of Bigger’s silence and subverts its meaning.  Taken at face value, the narrator’s “translation” of Bigger’s consciousness and preoccupation with his emotions encourages readers to view Bigger’s acts of violence as “the symbolic prelude to his creation of new paradigms for self-expression” (Tanner 421).  This produces a palpable tension between narrative expectations and the reality of Bigger’s bleak and uninspiring speeches and actions.  Within this symbolic framework, Bigger’s tendency to use violent acts as a form of self-expression starkly contrast the “civilized” linguistic articulations of the narrator.  Bigger’s utterances appear crude and simplistic when read in contrast to the narrator’s elegant prose.  For example, Bigger’s return to the Dalton residence the morning after Mary’s death features a heavily descriptive scene in which Bigger nervously inspects the furnace for any remains: 

> The inside of the furnace breathed and quivered in the grip of fiery coals. But there was no sign of the body, even though the body’s image hovered before his eyes . . . The coals had the appearance of having burnt the body beneath, leaving the glowing embers formed into a shell of red hotness with a hollowed space in the center, keeping still in the embrace of the quivering coals the huddled shape of Mary’s body. (153)

This haunting image of a body outline of ashes within a furnace is made so affecting through the use of figurative language, particularly the personification of fire flames and coals.  Bigger does not speak during this scene, although both before and after this visit to the furnace room he interacts with the housekeeper, Peggy, and his contributions consist of the predictable “Yessum” and  “No’m.”  In creating this contrast between varied, vivid descriptions and monotonous, simplistic utterances, the narrator presents Bigger as lacking the linguistic abilities necessary in order to succeed in white America.  The narrator’s symbolic style is yet another way in which Bigger’s participation in the master language illuminates his exclusion from the dominant society.  

Most striking of the problematic narrative elements are the frequent emotion-laden descriptions, especially as they relate to Bigger’s actions and reactions to environmental elements.  That Bigger *feels* everything precludes his *knowing* anything.  Tanner argues that by focusing on Bigger’s emotional journey, the narrator eliminates the possibility that Bigger might rationalize, theorize, and strategize: “By refusing to attribute to Bigger the consciousness inherent in thought, the narrator relegates him to the inarticulate world” (419).  One of these many dehumanizing passages occurs when Bigger first arrives at the Dalton residence and is unsure as to which entrance he should use:   

> He grew *angry*. Why had he come to take this goddamn job? He could have stayed among his own people and escaped feeling this *fear* and *hate*. This was not his world; he had been *foolish* in thinking that he would have liked it. He stood in the middle of the sidewalk with his jaws clamped tight; he wanted to strike something with his fist. Well… Goddamn! (Wright, *Native Son* 71; emphasis added)

The narrator fabricates Bigger’s confusion through a muddled articulation of his emotional journey from anger to fear, then abruptly to hatred, and finally to foolishness, all across the short span of four sentences.  Every time one emotion slips into another, the narrator suggests Bigger’s inability to establish emotional grounding is responsible for impending acts of aggression; his frustration mounting, Bigger shifts quickly through varying emotional states.  Also evidenced by this example is how Bigger moves from a simple and clear statement, to a question, to more complex negotiations, until he finally finds himself frustrated by his inability to articulate his consciousness, at which point he resorts to profanities.  Additionally, the narrator fixates on rewriting Bigger’s thoughts as emotions in an “attempt to achieve plausibility” for the narrative (Tanner 418).  It is difficult to believe, for example, that the sophisticated motifs and metaphors discussed above originate within Bigger’s consciousness.  Following this, the narrator aims to “authenticate the source of such insights by claiming that they originate as hazy or undeveloped notions in Bigger’s mind” (418).  Whether or not Bigger is actually capable of composing such thoughts, there is still a huge discrepancy between the Bigger that the reader experiences though his utterances and actions, and the man the narrator creates through descriptions of his interior monologue.  For this reason, in these moments when emotions “slip,” the narrator reveals to the reader *his* inability to recount Bigger’s story.

As Wright’s previous literary work, *Uncle Tom’s Children* (1938), had been widely embraced by the white American literary base, critics have assumed that he wrote Native Son “primarily for whites with justice in mind” (Douglas 89).  While Wright undoubtedly considered his expected white readership, he also claimed that he would not write another text that a banker’s daughter would read and feel good about.  Perhaps his primary intended audience for *Native Son* consisted of white *and* black communist affiliates and members of the Communist Party.  In his final exchange with Max, Bigger is at last able to articulate that which he has “created” through the murders:

> Bigger saw Max back away from him with compressed lips. But he felt he had to make Max understand how he saw things now.
“I didn’t want to kill!” Bigger shouted. “But what I killed for, I *am*!” (Wright, *Native Son* 498)

Through the language of violence, Bigger has attained some degree of self-expression and self-determinacy.  Fairfield considers Bigger’s final remarks to Max as evidencing a proficiency in Standard English and therefore suggesting that he “has acquired a voice that allows him to communicate” with both white and black Americans (73).  While I do not attribute hybrid qualities to Bigger’s speech at this time, I agree that he has succeeded in speaking across racial boundaries through his acts of violence.  However, this attainment of self-expression comes at the ultimate cost—his life—and the engagement across racial boundaries comes too late.  

The “*more*” that Wright promises this novel conveys is a critique of the practices and ideology of the American Communist Party as it did (or did not) work to help further the African American cause.  Wright makes painfully obvious the white impulse to eliminate any attempts by the black community to obtain their own voice.  Furthermore, I suggest that *Native Son* shows that there can be no one, whole, truthful, accurate, informed teller of this story because Bigger has not been afforded the educational opportunities to be able to articulate what he feels, and Max cannot access Bigger’s consciousness across the racial divide.

**Works Cited**

Best, Stephen, and Sharon Marcus. "Surface Reading: An Introduction." *Representations* 108.1 (2009): 1-21. Web. 11 Apr. 2015.

Caren, Neal. “An introduction to text analysis with Python, Part 1.” Neal Caren. University of North Carolina, 4 Apr. 2012. Web. 20 Mar. 2015.

---. “An introduction to text analysis with Python, Part 2.” Neal Caren. University of North Carolina, 6 Apr. 2012. Web. 20 Mar. 2015.

---. “An introduction to text analysis with Python, Part 3.” Neal Caren. University of North Carolina, 10 Apr. 2012. Web. 20 Mar. 2015.

DeCoste, Damon Marcel. “To Blot It All Out: The Politics of Realism in Richard Wright’s Native Son.” *Style* 32.1 (1998): 127-147. Web. 15 Mar. 2015.

Douglas, Christopher. *A Genealogy of Literary Multiculturalism.* Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009. Print. 

Elder, Matthew. “Social Demarcation and the Forms of Psychological Fracture in Book One of Richard Wright’s Native Son.” *Texas Studies in Literature and Language* 52.1 (2010): 31-47. Web. 26 Jan. 2015.

Ellison, Ralph. “Richard Wright’s Blues.” *The Antioch Review* 57.3 (1999): 263-276. Web. 2 Apr. 2015.

---. “The World and the Jug.” *The Collected Essays of Ralph Ellison.* Ed. John F. Callahan. New York: Random House Publishing Group, 2011. 155-188. Web. 5 Apr. 2015.

Fairfield, James. “Deadly Discourses: Examining the Roles of Language and Silence in the Lynching of Emmett Till and Wright’s Native Son.” *Arizona Quarterly: A Journal of American Literature, Culture, and Theory* 63.4 (2007): 63-82. Web. 4 Mar. 2015.

Golder, Scott A., and Michael W. Macy. “Diurnal and Seasonal Mood Vary with Work, Sleep, and Daylength Across Diverse Cultures.” *Science* 333.6051 (2011): 1878-1881. Web. 11 Apr. 2015. 

Miller, James A. “Bigger Thomas’s Quest for Voice and Audience in Richard Wright’s Native Son.” *Callaloo: A Journal of African American and African Arts and Letters* 9.3 (28) (1986): 501-506. Web. 15 Mar. 2015.

Precoda, Karl, and P. S. Polanah. “In the Vortex of Modernity: Writing Blackness, Blindness and Insight.” *Journal of Modern Literature* 34.3 (2011): 31-46. Web. 15 Mar. 2015.

Ramsay, Stephen. *Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism.* Urbana: University of Illinois, 2011. Print.

Siegel, Paul N. “The Conclusion Of Richard Wright’s Native Son.” *PMLA: Publications Of The Modern Language Association Of America* 89.3 (1974): 517-523. Web. 15 Mar. 2015.

Tanner, Laura. “Uncovering the Magical Disguise of Language: The Narrative Presence in Richard Wright's Native Son.” *Texas Studies in Literature and Language* 29.4 (1987): 412. Web. 15 Mar. 2015.

Wright, Richard. “How ‘Bigger’ Was Born.” *Native Son*. New York: Perennial Classics, 1998. 431-462. Print.

---. *Native Son*. HarperCollins e-books, 2009. iBooks file.
